Article III. City Council

§ C-7. City Council membership, terms, vacancies and salaries.
[Amended by L.L. No. 1-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1983, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1989, § 1; L.L. No. 8-1994, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1994; 12-16-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999; 7-10-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001; 2-20-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
The City Council shall be composed of nine Council members. Three of the nine Council members shall be elected from the City at large; and the remaining six Council members shall be elected by the resident electors of each of the six Council districts. Each of the six district Council members shall be at the time of his/her election and during their terms of office resident electors of the district from which each is elected. The three at-large Council members shall be electors of the City of Troy at the time of their election and during their term of office. Each Council member shall be elected for a two-year term with each term beginning on January 1 of the year immediately following his or her election. No council member, whether district Council member or at-large Council member, shall serve more than four consecutive two-year terms of office. Should a Council member be appointed by the Council to fill a vacancy on the Council and then subsequently win the Council member seat at the general election held pursuant to this paragraph, said member shall not serve longer than nine consecutive years. In the event that any Council members dies, ceases to be an elector of the City of Troy, or, in the case of district Council members, ceases to be a resident of the district from which he or she was elected or is otherwise unable to serve as a Council member, a vacancy in the office shall exist and the vacancy shall be filled by a vote of the remaining members of the Council; and in the event of a tie vote, the City Judge of the City of Troy shall cast the deciding vote. Any vacancy so filled shall be for a term expiring on December 31 of the first year at which the vacancy can be filled at a general election. The balance of the term, if any, shall be filled by the person receiving the most votes at such general election. City elections shall be in accordance with the election law of the State of New York. All Council members shall be paid an annual salary of $15,000, with payments to be made in biweekly installments.
§ C-8. Drawing of districts boundaries; redistricting.
[Added by L.L. No. 2-1982, § 1]
Not later than January 1, 1983, the City Council shall draw the boundaries of the six Councilmanic districts. The City Council shall draw the districts in such manner that each district shall contain not less than 13% nor more than 18% of the population of the City. Thereafter, not later than six months after the availability of population data on a ward or census tract basis after each federal decennial census, the Council shall reconsider the boundaries of the Councilmanic districts. If it finds that the number of persons enumerated in any Councilmanic district is less than 13% or more than 18% of the total persons enumerated in the City, it shall forthwith proceed by ordinance to redistrict the City in such manner that each district shall contain less than 13% nor more than 18% of the population of the City.
§ C-9. President of City Council.
[Amended by L.L. No. 2-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1993; L.L. No. 5-1994, § 1]
The at-large City Council candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the general election shall be designated President at the first organizational meeting of the City Council following said election. In the event of a tie, designation of one of the candidates receiving identical pluralities shall be made by majority vote of the City Council. The President shall be the presiding officer of the Council; shall be the Chair of the standing committee on finance; and shall be, ex officio, a nonvoting member of all other standing committees. The President, as an elected Council member, shall have a vote on all matters coming before the Council. The President shall have the salary of a Council member and, in addition, such further amount as may be set each year by the Council. Editor's Note: Original Section 2.01.1, "State of the City" report, which immediately followed this section, as amended by L.L. No. 1-1993 and L.L. No. 5-1994, was renumbered as § 3.04.1 (now § C-49) on 12-3-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998.
§ C-10. President Pro Tempore.
[Amended by L.L. No. 5-1994; 12-3-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998]
The President Pro Tempore of the City Council shall be selected by the City Council at its organizational meeting from among its elected members to serve until a successor is chosen at the following organizational meeting. The President Pro Tempore of the City Council shall perform the duties of the President of the City Council in the case of the absence of the President of the City Council or in the case of a vacancy in the office of the President of the City Council. The President Pro Tempore shall have the salary of a Council member and, in addition, such further amount as may be set by the Council.
§ C-11. Legislative assistant to City Council.
[Amended by L.L. No. 8-1977, § 1; L.L. No 2-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1981, § 1]
There shall be a legislative assistant to the City Council who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. His/Her powers and duties shall be exercised under the direction and control of the City Council. He/She shall have access to all offices of the City, courts, boards and commissions in order to aid the City Council in legislating City affairs.
§ C-11A. Legislative Counsel.
[Added by L.L. No. 1-2009, § 1]
There shall be a legislative counsel to the City Council majority, appointed by the majority caucus, and a legislative counsel to the City Council minority, appointed by the minority caucus. The legislative counsel shall be admitted to the New York State Bar. Every legislative counsel shall act as legal advisor to their respective appointing authorities, and shall represent them in litigation when requested to do so by their appointing authority. They shall be entitled to the full cooperation of all City officers in the discharge of their duties as legislative counsel, and any officer of the City shall be and is required to furnish all information, reports, records and documents of any kind or nature as may be authorized by law to a legislative counsel upon request, and the same shall be furnished without the necessity of filing a written request therefor pursuant to the New York State Freedom of Information Law. Legislative counsel shall be paid a salary in an amount allocated therefor in the annual City budget, which amount shall not exceed the salary of a councilperson. The salary for the two legislative counsels shall be equal. Filing fees and other incidental expenses related to any litigation undertaken by legislative counsel shall be a charge to the Judgment and Claims account, or other appropriate account of the City. For purposes of applying this section, the term "caucus" shall refer to a body composed of one or more council members who are enrolled in the same political party, said political party being one of the two political parties having the highest voter enrollment in the City of Troy. The term "majority caucus" shall apply to the caucus having the larger number of council members. The term "minority caucus" shall apply to the caucus having the smaller number of council members. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit a caucus from admitting to the caucus a council member enrolled in a political party different than the political party of said caucus.
