Article V. Standing and Special Committees

§ C-15. Standing committees.
[Amended by L.L. No. 16-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1988, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1994, § 5; L.L. No. 1-2010, § 1]
There shall be standing committees of the City Council on finance, on law, on planning and community development, on public safety, on public works, on public utilities, on human resources, on recreation and on technology. The Committee on Finance shall consist of the President as Chair and all other Council members. Each of the other committees shall consist of at least three Council members, one of whom shall be designated Chair by the committee. Committee members shall be nominated by the President and confirmed or rejected by a majority of the members of the Council at each organizational meeting. Each committee, if possible, shall have at least one member from a minority political party. If an original nominee of the President is rejected by the Council, the President shall immediately submit to the Council a list of three nominees in the place of such original nominee, which original nominee shall not be renominated by the President. The Council shall select, at the said organization meeting, from each list so submitted, one Council member to serve as committee member in a place of the rejected nominee. Only Council members shall have the right to vote as members of standing committees. All committee reports shall be made public.
§ C-16. Responsibilities of standing committees.
[Added by L.L. No. 16-1978, § 2; amended by L.L. No. 3-1988, § 2]
A. Finance. The standing Committee on Finance shall periodically review and report on the budget, audits and accounts, the Bureau of Assessments, and the Bureau of Purchases. Membership on this Committee shall include the Comptroller, Auditor, Treasurer, Assessors, Purchasing Agent and all City Council members.
B. Human resources. The standing Committee on Human Resources shall consider and report on matters involving senior citizens, the homeless and human rights in the City of Troy. Membership on this Committee shall include the Corporation Counsel and at least three City Council members.
C. Law. The standing Committee on Law shall periodically review and report on all actions, suits, and proceedings brought by or against the City. Membership on this Committee shall include the Corporation Counsel, his/her staff and at least three City Council members.
D. Planning and community development. The standing Committee on Planning shall periodically review and report on planning and community development for the physical and social planning for the City. Membership on this Committee shall include the Commissioner of Planning and Community Development, his/her assistants, the Chair of the Planning Commission, and at least three City Council members.
E. Public safety. The standing Committee on Public Safety shall periodically review and report on the Bureaus of Police and Fire. Membership on this Committee shall include the Commissioner of Public Safety, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and at least three City Council members.
F. Public works. The standing Committee on Public Works shall periodically review and report on public works, engineering, streets, sanitation, buildings and safety inspection. Membership on this Committee shall include the Commissioner of Public Works, City Engineer, Superintendent of Streets, Superintendent of Sanitation, and the Superintendent of Buildings, and at least three City Council members.
G. Public utilities. The standing Committee on Public Utilities shall periodically review and report on public utilities, the water plant, water maintenance and sewer maintenance. Membership on this Committee shall include the Commissioner of Public Utilities, Chief Water Plant Operator, Superintendent of Water, Superintendent of Sewers, and at least three City Council members.
H. Recreation. The standing Committee on Recreation shall periodically review and report on parks, conservation and recreation. Membership on this Committee shall include the Commissioner of Recreation, his/her assistant, the Chair of the Recreation Commission and at least three City Council members.
I. Technology. The standing Committee on Technology shall periodically review and report on the use of technology in government, including but not limited to information services, network security, hardware and software procurement, energy efficiency and sustainability. Membership on this Committee shall include the Deputy Mayor and, at his/her discretion, a representative of the Bureau of Information Services and at least three City Council members.
[Added by L.L. No. 1-2010, § 1]
§ C-17. Meetings of standing committees.
[Added by L.L. No. 1-1993]
All standing committees of the City Council shall meet at least once every two months (except for special meetings). Public notice of regular meetings shall be posted at City Hall and made known to appropriate local news media, for announcement at least one week prior to each meeting. Meetings of standing committees shall be open to public attendance. Participation, however, shall be restricted to committee members, except that citizen participation may be allowed by invitation of committee chairpersons.
§ C-18. Legislative functions of standing committees.
[Added by L.L. No1-1985, § 1]
A. All legislation drafted by the Corporation Counsel at the request of the administration shall be referred to the Chair of the standing committee of the City Council having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the legislation, and it shall be placed on the agenda for the next meeting of the City Council.
(1) If the Chair does not agree to sponsor the legislation, it shall be referred to the whole committee for consideration and must receive approval by majority vote of the standing committee prior to its inclusion on a City Council agenda.
(2) In the event such legislation does not receive approval within 30 days of its referral to the committee, it then may be discharged from committee by petition signed by a majority of the whole Council.
B. All legislation drafted by the Corporation Counsel at the request of any member of the Council shall first be presented to and considered by the standing committee of the Council having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the legislation and must receive approval by majority vote of the standing committee prior to its inclusion on a City Council agenda. In the event such legislation does not receive approval within 30 days of its referral to the committee, it then may be discharged from committee by petition signed by a majority of the whole Council.
§ C-19. Special committees.
Special committees may be authorized by the City Council to study and report on any matter of interest to the Council, provided such matter is not clearly within the purview of a standing committee of the Council. The resolution creating the special committee shall recite the scope of the committee's assignment; shall name the personnel of the committee; and may contain an appropriation to cover the anticipated expenses of the committee. At least 1/3 of the membership of any special committee shall be composed of Council members.
